JAKE: You were sat at your
desk, and then a real engineer
stood behind you
and held your hands.
Maybe--
ROB DODSON: Like the
scene from "Ghost."
No.
JAKE: Yeah, is there a special
pair of gloves that has two--
you put the gloves on, they put
SURMA: The tandem--
JAKE: --their hands
in the gloves.
SURMA: --gloves.
JAKE: --and they just type.
They're like, Rob, this
counts as you doing it.
This is you.
Look, you're writing C++.
Look at you go.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
SURMA: I don't know how you
feel about existential crises,
but who are you, and why?
ROB DODSON: So,
hi, I'm Rob Dodson.
I'm a developer advocate
on the Chrome team.
And why-- I mainly work on
accessibility, and trying
to sort of teach developers
how to build accessible
applications, make sure it's
part of their daily habit
when they're doing their work.
SURMA: I think you're
the first one who
just glosses over the
why, and just turns
into a job description.
ROB DODSON: I--
SURMA: Like, we've gotten
very weird answers.
JAKE: That's DevRel
training, right?
SURMA: Yeah, it's just like--
ROB DODSON: Yeah.
I just reverted
back to my training,
and it just sort of kicked in.
[LAUGHTER]
I imagined I was on a stage,
and it was going badly,
and I just started
saying my job title.
JAKE: We just sort of activated
you there, that was it.
Well, bringing you
back to humanity,
so you've been doing an
eng rotation recently.
ROB DODSON: I have, yeah.
JAKE: So what's that?
You stand in the spot and spin
around, but with a computer.
ROB DODSON: With the
other eng people.
SURMA: It's like
a spinning class.
JAKE: Yeah.
ROB DODSON: Yeah.
So what I've been doing the
previous quarter was actually
working on Chromium,
so working in C++.
SURMA: That's dreadful.
ROB DODSON: It was, because I
didn't know C++ when I started
it.
So I learned enough
C++ to be bad at it,
and then I started shipping
code in the browser, which was--
SURMA: And having
other people review
your code until you were--
ROB DODSON: Yeah, so basically
the way that works is,
like, I put up a patch, and
someone goes, it's horrible.
And then I'm like--
they're like, down there;
move it over there.
And I'm like, here?
And they're like, there?
And they're like, yes.
The funny thing was it wasn't
even an engineer I knew.
It was an engineer from
a different browser,
who was just so
annoyed by my bad code
that they just showed up
from, like, another continent,
and were like, (IN THROATY,
ANIMATED TONE) stop!
Like, do it this way.
JAKE: That's a long way to run.
ROB DODSON: Yes.
JAKE: So another continent--
ROB DODSON: But they
brought the gloves.
JAKE: They see your
code, and they stand up
and they go, (IN
SLOW MOTION) no.
But from--
ROB DODSON: Something like that.
JAKE: From where?
ROB DODSON: From Oslo.
JAKE: From Oslo.
That's a long run.
ROB DODSON: Yeah.
SURMA: That's impressive.
ROB DODSON: Yeah, yeah.
But it was really cool.
I got to learn a lot
about how Chrome actually
works under the hood, so
that was really interesting.
I'd actually encourage
anyone who is really
interested in the browser--
you can learn enough C++
to kind of get in there.
And the nice thing is--
this is a tip I got from
another person on the team--
if the code around
you is written well,
you can kind of figure it out.
You can kind of muddle along.
And so that's the case, right.
I got in there, and
I found something
that was similar to what I
wanted to do, and kind of just
like--
SURMA: Copy, paste.
ROB DODSON: Yeah.
SURMA: Let's say it.
It's copy, paste.
JAKE: But I find the same
with web standards, actually.
I kind of sometimes
submit a patch,
and the feedback
would be like, why
on earth have you
written it like this,
and I was like, well,
I copy and pasted it
from two lines that way.
So, well, it's wrong.
Well, I mean, how can I help
being wrong in this situation.
ROB DODSON: You're
like, I'm new.
And so yeah, I was very wrong
pretty much all the time.
But it was pretty
gratifying, like,
getting something
behind a flag in Chrome.
SURMA: I mean, you're now the
owner of a flag in Chrome,
right?
That's the thing you wrote.
ROB DODSON: Yeah.
The experimental web
platform features flags,
which kind of like a bucket.
Everything goes in there.
But yeah, I'm the owner of
a pseudo-class in CSS now.
JAKE: That's cool.
So what have you actually
been implementing?
ROB DODSON: So it's
a CSS pseudo-class
called Focus Visible.
And the way it works is it
matches when Focus matches,
and then using kind of
an internal heuristic
in the browser, we
determined that it
would be useful
for the user to see
some sort of focus indicators.
So typically that
means, depending
on if they're using a
mouse versus a keyboard
to navigate the page,
if you're using a mouse,
depending on the
control, maybe you
don't need to see one if
you're clicking on a button,
or something like that.
JAKE: Right.
I've had that problem before.
And I feel like I've been
making things not accessible,
because I don't want, when
the user clicks with a mouse,
it to have that
same focus style.
You end up doing
weird hacks like,
oh, if there's a mouse down, add
a class somewhere or something
that will hide the focus
styles or something.
SURMA: So it's not a thing I can
do star, focus visible, focus
ring, and then--
ROB DODSON: Well, there's no--
I mean, you just use outline.
SURMA: Oh, outline.
ROB DODSON: Right-- for
your focus indicator.
Yeah.
SURMA: That's outline,
but isn't the--
ROB DODSON: Focus visible
used to be called focus ring,
actually, and we renamed it.
SURMA: Oh, that's
the same thing?
ROB DODSON: Yeah.
SURMA: So, can I do-- because
by default, the outline
is kind of blurred, right?
It fades out.
Can I do that?
ROB DODSON: Yes.
So someone was telling me
if you just do outline auto,
it should revert to that, but
that actual-- so the blue thing
that you see there is in
the user agent style sheet.
It's kind of cool.
If you just open up--
what is it-- cs.chromium.org,
and type in HTML.css, that's
all the styles in the browser,
is that file, and that's
the kind of thing that I kind
of got to discover on the eng
rotation, is you can just go
in there and you could be like,
I can just change
this if I want.
SURMA: You will see interesting
units like the QEMs--
the quirky EMs.
ROB DODSON: Yeah.
Weird stuff.
It's just like--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
JAKE: So when you're saying
it's heuristics-based, I mean,
how do you get that
for a standard?
ROB DODSON: So actually,
we're still working on that.
That was some of the feedback
that we got, which was like,
we want to know more about the
conformance for this thing.
So we're working on a patch
right now to really explain
when we think it's beneficial.
And so typically
for anything where
you know the user is going
to be providing some keyboard
input, like a text field
or something like that,
you probably always
want to show it then.
Whereas for something where
the only action is literally
click a thing--
like a button, or a
slider knob or something--
you maybe don't want
it in those cases.
So it kind of depends on the
intent of the interaction
and everything.
SURMA: But in the end, it's
going to be left to the UA
to decide what--
ROB DODSON: Yeah.
Ultimately-- so there'll be
some conformance criteria
that we're going to recommend,
and hopefully everyone
would follow that, because you
would want it to be consistent,
because otherwise it
ends up with just yet
another kind of broken
focus experience.
SURMA: Yeah.
That makes sense.
JAKE: So you're speaking
about accessibility, right,
at I/O. Is that Focus
Ring, or are you
covering other stuff as well?
ROB DODSON: Yeah, so
we're going to talk
about what's new in DevTools.
So there's some cool
accessibility stuff
that we've added there,
talk about Focus Visible,
and then the other
thing we're going
to talk about in the second
half, Dominic Mazzoni, who
is an engineer on
the blink team is
going to come up and talk
about accessibility object
model, which is--
SURMA: The infamous AOM.
ROB DODSON: Yes.
Or "ay-ahm,"
depending on how you--
SURMA: The "ay-ahm."
ROB DODSON: --depending on
the camp that you fall in.
So yeah, that's actually
a way to just create
your own virtual
accessibility tree,
listen for accessibility--
SURMA: Well, let's stop
there, because what even
is an accessibility tree?
ROB DODSON: Oh, OK.
Yeah.
So that's actually
a good question.
So this is something
I didn't really
understand for a long time.
I was like, how does the
browser make a screen reader say
the things that it says?
And it was always just
kind of a mystery to me.
But basically it's like
you've got your HTML--
SURMA: Which is a tree.
ROB DODSON: Right.
That gets turned into DOM--
which, developers are
familiar with that.
But then the browser
does this one extra step,
where it takes the
DOM and it sort of
prunes out all the
parts that are not
semantically interesting.
So if you've got a bunch of
divs just for positioning things
on screen, it just sort
of throws those away.
It builds this sparse tree
of just the semantic goodies,
and that's the
accessibility tree,
and that's what
actually gets handed off
to assistive technology.
JAKE: So it's if I do something
like area hidden, then that's
my instruction to say, don't put
this in the accessibility tree.
ROB DODSON: Yeah, you're pruning
out a whole chunk of the DOM
from the accessibility tree.
SURMA: I mean, it kind of sounds
similar, coming from the CSS,
like display non--
remove something from the
rendering tree, which you also
have.
ROB DODSON: And also removes
it from the accessibility tree.
Yeah.
SURMA: It's so many trees.
ROB DODSON: Yes.
There are trees
all the way down.
JAKE: So we're actually
getting access to this tree?
ROB DODSON: Yeah.
What you'll be able to do--
there's kind of a few things.
You'll be able to listen to
certain events that previously
were only available through
accessible technology.
And the other
thing you can do is
you can actually
just kind of create
virtual branches
of the tree if you
want I think of it that way.
SURMA: That's probably
really [INAUDIBLE]
for like, for example,
Canvas, right?
ROB DODSON: Indeed, yes.
Canvas-- if you're building
WebGL, maybe some kind of SVG
that's hard to make
accessible, or maybe even just
like a regular DOM component.
For the longest time, it's
been really, really difficult
in some situations where
you have something,
and in Canvas, it's
almost like a black box,
but DOM it could be just
a really elaborate thing
for something presentational.
But now you can just hook in
there, and you can just say,
you know what--
SURMA: I know better.
ROB DODSON: Exactly.
You're like, I know this
is all weird and elaborate,
but here's the actual thing
I want to be represented
in the accessibility tree.
SURMA: Is that pure
JavaScript API,
or are we going to
be markup as well?
ROB DODSON: It'll be pure
JavaScript, at least initially.
SURMA: OK, sure.
ROB DODSON: But yeah.
So it'll be all JavaScript.
JAKE: So one of the struggles,
I think, with accessibility
is getting developers
to care about it.
And I felt like performance
is in that bucket as well.
It's slightly difficult
to get budget for that,
even though I would
say, well, I think
accessibility is a lot of people
who get real value from it,
and with performance as well.
With performance,
I feel like AMP
has done a really good job
of taking that to businesses
and saying performance
is important.
SURMA: Making it
the default, right?
JAKE: Yeah.
What can we do for accessibility
to achieve the same?
ROB DODSON: Yeah.
So it's tough, because
accessibility--
because the area is really
broad, some of things
fall into user
experience and design.
So color contrast and
stuff like that, people
tend to pick that up,
and incorporate it
into their design process
a little bit better.
You get into other
areas, though, like,
screen reader support in
Aria, and a lot of people
are like, well, that's
not my problem, right.
It's sort of out of
sight, out of mind.
If it's not something
that's directly
affecting the developer,
they kind of just
don't care about it.
So I think what has been really
successful for a lot of teams
has been doing a more
inclusive design approach,
so making sure that
you're bringing in people
who may have disabilities or
impairments into the design
phase-- into the
product testing phase.
And you know, even also making
sure that you're employing
those folks on your team, even.
Engineers on your team might
have disabilities and things
like that, because
if it doesn't work
for literally the
engineer on the team,
it's not going to ship, right.
SURMA: Pretty much.
ROB DODSON: And so we
need to just, I think,
in general do a better
job of including more
people in our design practice.
As a result, hopefully
it just becomes something
that everyone does as
part of their daily habit.
SURMA: Well, thank you
so much for joining us.
ROB DODSON: Thank you
all for having me.
SURMA: Good luck
with your talk, and--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
I thought that was something.
JAKE: You can't do that.
You can't set me up, and then
look at me, and just say, and--
SURMA: You've got
to finish this.
JAKE: And ta-da.
ROB DODSON: I think I totally
messed you up by saying,
thank you for having me.
SURMA: It's fine.
It's fine.
ROB DODSON: Do you
want to try that again?
SURMA: No.
JAKE: No.
SURMA: We're just
going to leave this.
ROB DODSON: Oh, OK.
JAKE: This is ending, though.
ROB DODSON: All right.
All right, well,
JAKE: We're going to
keep dragging it out
like the final "Lord of the
Rings," like so many endings.
ROB DODSON: Should we do a
long fist bump or something?
JAKE: When is your talk?
It's soon, right?
So we're just going to go
straight-- this ending is going
to last straight into the talk.
ROB DODSON: Right into the talk.
OK; that's good.
JAKE: All right.
ROB DODSON: All right.
JAKE: Cool.
[LAUGHTER]